# Data-Science-Capstone-Project
This repository contains the code and findings of my data science capstone project<br />
To see the progression and results of the project go to the Capstone Project PPTx file and download it to view the PowerPoint <br />
TLDR summary of the project <br />
<br />•The purpose of this project was to use machine learning in the form of regression models to research diabetes diagnosed incidence and mortality rates in the U.S. and see what interesting trends and information I could learn from them to better understand diabetes in the U.S. <br />
<br />•To accomplish this I took data from the census, country health rankings, and CDC. This data included diabetes diagnosed incidence and mortality rates as well as data on independent variables such as population demographics and health. This data was all at the county level. I also took some data at the state level to use for visualization in the PowerPoint <br />
<br />•After collecting the datasets I performed some data exploration and then cleaned and merged them into two separate datasets, one for both dependent variables. I also checked for multicollinearity among the independent variables  <br />
<br />•To analyze the data I constructed three linear regressions, a stepAIC(backward) model, a random forest model, and a xgboost model for both dependent variables. The linear and stepAIC models were done in R and the random forest and xgboost models were done in Python. In order to select the model that best represented the relationship between diabetes incidence/mortality rates and the independent variables. I created a train and testing set with the data(75% train, 25% test). I used the trainset to train the models and then predict on the testing set. I then calculated each model's root mean square error and selected the model with the least error as the best model. For both diagnosed diabetes incidence rate and mortality rate, the stepAIC model had the least root mean square error which makes sense as the stepAIC model has the lowest AIC meaning it should fit the data the best. <br />
<br />•While many of the findings from the regression analysis were fairly obvious, such as the regression coefficient for obesity was statistically significant and positive, meaning obesity clearly increased your chances of being diagnosed with diabetes, there were also some unintuitive and interesting findings as well. For example, excessive drinking and being uninsured were statistically significant and had negative regression coefficients for both incidence rate and mortality rate. This means that excessive drinking and lack of insurance decreased your chances of being diagnosed or dying from diabetes. This was also the case with smoking but it wasn't statistically significant. I explained this by thinking that people who were less responsible with their health, i.e. smokers, drinkers, and people without insurance were less likely to see a doctor and get diagnosed and were more likely to die of something other than diabetes since diabetes takes a fair amount of time to kill someone, leading to the negative regression coefficients for both incidence and mortality rate<br />
<br />•Another unintuitive finding was that for the regressions with incidence rate as the dependent variable the independent variable percent female was statistically significant and positive. This meant counties with more women were likely to be diagnosed with more diabetes, meaning women were likely to be diagnosed with diabetes. This was an odd result because across the world diabetes impacts men more than women and the U.S. is in fact the only country where women are just as likely as men to be diagnosed with diabetes. The regressions with mortality rate as the dependent variables also had the percent female regression coefficient as statistically significant and negative meaning women were less likely to die from diabetes. To explain this I theorized that women in the U.S. must be more likely to see their doctors and be diagnosed when compared to men. There is a huge number of undiagnosed Americans with diabetes and I think it is very likely more than half of them are men. This would explain why women were more likely to be diagnosed with diabetes in my regression when men and women in the U.S. have similar incidence rates. It would also explain why men are more affected by diabetes globally but not in the U.S. This would suggest that men in the U.S. are in fact more affected by diabetes than women as they are across the globe, but that for whatever reason, men in the U.S. are less likely than women to see a doctor and get diagnosed<br />
<br />•Another interesting finding from the regression analysis was that there was a group of six states(Arkansas, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Iowa, Kansas, and Texas) that had negative regression coefficients for incidence rate but positive regression coefficients for mortality rate(they were all statistically significant as well), meaning people in these states were less likely to be diagnosed with diabetes but more likely to die from it which doesn't make sense. Again I theorized that people in these states must be less health conscious and therefore less likely to see a doctor and get diagnosed as well as these states might have worse healthcare infrastructure leading to fewer people being diagnosed and more people dying. These states have high obesity rates and as stated before are more likely to die from diabetes so it's pretty clear they have a high population of people who are undiagnosed. Whether it's for the reasons I theorized above or something else would have to investigate further 
